Post: dropping MySQL (#1404)
theforeman/theforeman.org: _posts/2019-06-28-dropping-support-for-mysql.md

Foreman 1.22 currently requires one of the following databases:

* PostgreSQL 9.2 or newer
* MySQL 5.5 or newer

This is not an extensive list you might think. Supporting two databases must not be that hard. Truth is, it's a challenge.

Those two items on the list are both relational database systems with SQL standard, the problem is that very often behavior is different. Most of our development team use PostgreSQL and there are dozens of things that are different in MySQL. Therefore we need to identify those problems, find a way to fix them and then carry extra bit of code in our codebase for life. This takes a lot of our time we could invest in features, bugfixing or performance improvements.

We have dicussed preferring PostgreSQL many times, but [the last time was different](https://community.theforeman.org/t/minimum-rdbm-requirements/14127) and we came to conclusion that dropping MySQL the right thing to do. [The plan](https://community.theforeman.org/t/rfc-dropping-support-for-mysql/14185) was then set and we are at the beginning of the journey where the first and really difficult step is on you, our users:

**Foreman 1.23 will be the last version with MySQL support.**

> The upcoming version 1.23 will also feature a warning UI strip in case it's running on MySQL. Don't worry, we will let you close the warning as soon as you see it, but we want to communicate this properly and in advance. We highly recommend to do the database migration to PostgreSQL during upgrade to version 1.23 because if there is a blocker bug that prevents from migrating to MySQL, there is still a backup plan of holding off migration and staying on MySQL for one more release until we come up with version 1.24 which will be PostgreSQL only. This is important:

Reviewer: The UI warning is still missing

Author: Going to push PR shortly.

**Do not wait with the migration for Foreman 1.24.**

Along with the 1.23 release, we will provide official [migration documentation](/manuals/nightly/index.html#3.7MigratingtoPostgreSQL), and mention it in our Release Notes as well. If you do such testing, please come back to us with time estimation so we can tell our users in advance what to expect.

> It was not easy decision, we tried hard in the past to support both databases. If you search for [PRs containing MySQL](https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/pulls?page=3&q=is%3Apr+mysql) you'll find counless workarounds, fixes and endless discussions about how to solve problems in a way that doesn't break for PostgreSQL users. There is one common theme everywhere: most developers do not use MySQL both for development and for production testing. This stems from the fact that Red Hat, a company which pays most of the users to do day-to-day development of Foreman, only have a product that is based on PostgreSQL. So we often try to reproduce things on PostgreSQL or blindly provide patches and let affected users to hotfix their instances. Also the biggest and most popular plugin called Katello does not support MySQL, so many community users are not using it at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was not easy decision, we tried hard in the past to support both databases. If you search for [PRs containing MySQL](https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/pulls?page=3&q=is%3Apr+mysql) you'll find countless workarounds, fixes and endless discussions about how to solve problems in a way that doesn't break for PostgreSQL users. There is one common theme everywhere: most developers do not regularly use MySQL both for development and for production testing. This is compounded by the fact that the two commercial products based on Foreman, Red Hat Satellite and Atix Orcharhino, only support PostgreSQL, and many of the Foreman developers are employed by them. As none of their customers use MySQL, there is less testing and usage of it leading to longer times until bugs are discovered and fixed. Also, one of the biggest and most popular plugins, Katello, does not support MySQL, so many community users are not using it either.
```

Author: Actually I dropped the whole paragraph, I just forgot to push properly.

---
layout: post
title: Dropping support for MySQL
date: 2019-06-28  9:34:21
author: Lukas Zapletal
tags:
- foreman
---

Foreman is essentially a Ruby on Rails application. A big one. And Ruby on Rails applications usually support multiple relational databases thanks to ActiveRecord stack. That's also the case for Foreman. But it's not that easy.

<!--more-->

Foreman 1.22 currently requires one of the following databases:

* PostgreSQL 9.2 or newer
* MySQL 5.5 or newer

This is not an extensive list you might think. Supporting two databases must not be that hard. Truth is, it's a challenge.

> Those two items on the list are both relational database systems with SQL standard, the problem is that very often behavior is different. Historically, some features were implemented differently, however it's pretty clear that PostgreSQL is now much closer to the RDBM "ideal" for both developers and operations, should I say. There are dozens of things that are just not right in MySQL and we need to identify those problems, find a way to fix them and then carry extra bit of code in our codebase for life. This takes a lot of our time we could invest in features, bugfixing or performance improvements.

Reviewer: Each DB has it's own merits. We aren't moving to PG because it's "better" but rather because supporting just one has its benefits, and we already have plugins and other services that require it. PG also has weird problems we need to identify and fix, but having less databases to support will reduce the amount of such workarounds and will stop forcing us to always write db-agnostic code.

Reviewer 2: https://about.gitlab.com/2019/06/27/removing-mysql-support/ is a similar blog about the exact same topic. One thing stood out to me:

> As a side note – we don't use MySQL ourselves, and not doing so meant we weren't encountering issues BEFORE our users.

Both commercial vendors (Red Hat and ATIX) both only deploy on PostgreSQL. That means they care about proper support. MySQL always has been best effort by the community. The Foreman project wants to deliver high quality software and that's more than just 'it compiles, ship it'.

That's at least my take on this.

Author: I am rewriting the paragraph and dropping all my biased words about MySQL :-)

**Foreman 1.23 will be the last version with MySQL support.**

The upcoming version 1.23 will also feature a warning UI strip in case it's running on MySQL. Don't worry, we will let you close the warning as soon as you see it, but we want to communicate this properly and in advance. We highly recommend to do the database migration to PostgreSQL during upgrade to version 1.23 because if there is a blocker bug that prevents from migrating to MySQL, there is still a backup plan of holding off migration and staying on MySQL for one more release until we come up with version 1.24 which will be PostgreSQL only. This is important:

**Do not wait with the migration for Foreman 1.24.**

Along with the 1.23 release, we will provide official migration documentation, and mention it in our Release Notes as well. If you want to give the migration a test shot today, there's an existing [migration blog post](https://theforeman.org/2017/10/migrating-foreman-from-mysql-to-postgresql.html) written by Timo. We don't expect the official document be very much different. If you do such testing, please come back to us with time estimation so we can tell our users in advance what to expect.

> It was not easy decision, we tried hard in the past to support both databases. If you search for [PRs containing MySQL](https://github.com/theforeman/foreman/pulls?page=3&q=is%3Apr+mysql) you'll find counless workarounds, fixes and endless discussions about how to solve problems in a way that doesn't break for PostgreSQL users. There is one common theme everywhere: most developers do not use MySQL both for development and for production testing. This stems from the fact that Red Hat, a company which pays most of the users to do day-to-day development of Foreman, only have a product that is based on PostgreSQL. So we often try to reproduce things on PostgreSQL or blindly provide patches and let affected users to hotfix their instances. Also the biggest and most popular plugin called Katello does not support MySQL, so many community users are not using it at all. Although we haven't asked about it explicitly in the Foreman Community Survey yet, we believe that the majority of our users use PostgreSQL already.

Reviewer: Red Hat isn't the reason developers don't use MySQL, some RH developers actually do, and in any case this isn't the reason for moving away from PG. I would drop that sentence.

Author: Sure removing.

> We don't stop here, the next target is dropping SQLite3 forcing all developers to use PostgreSQL. It's the only reasonable way we can do in order to leverage all powerful features from the database system of our choice. However, again it's not easy. In the build process, we have a part that generates what's called APIPie bindings, a stack which provides API documentation and bindings metadata. And this needs to boot up Rails, and Rails needs a database to run on and we all do this in a build chroot which does not provide environment for starting up daemon like PostgreSQL. We need to figure out how to workaround this problem, until then we still support SQLite3 for development but developers be ready to say goodbye to SQLite3 any new version.

Reviewer: I don't think this paragraph is relevant for our users. This is a more developer oriented issue.

Author: However is it a reason not to communicate this? My thinking it - I don't want to leave users just with simple "it will be gone", I want to be as much as transparent about our plans, goals and long term vision.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps you can link to a Discourse RFC that talks about the future?

Author: Dropped it.
